Introduce a pure Swift runfiles library (#1310)
bazelbuild/rules_swift: swift/runfiles/README.md

# Swift BazelRunfiles library

This is a Bazel Runfiles lookup library for Bazel-built Swift binaries and tests.

Learn about runfiles: read [Runfiles guide](https://bazel.build/extending/rules#runfiles)
or watch [Fabian's BazelCon talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NbgUMH1OGo).

## Usage

1.  Depend on this runfiles library from your build rule:

```python
swift_binary(
    name = "my_binary",
    ...
    data = ["//path/to/my/data.txt"],

>     deps = ["@bazel_swift//swift/runfiles"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    deps = ["@build_bazel_rules_swift//swift/runfiles"],
```

)
```

2.  Include the runfiles library:

```swift
import BazelRunfiles
```

3.  Create a Runfiles instance and use `rlocation` to look up runfile urls:

```swift
import BazelRunfiles

> let runfiles = try? Runfiles.create(sourceRepository: BazelRunfilesConstants.currentRepository)
> 
> let fileURL = runfiles?.rlocation("my_workspace/path/to/my/data.txt")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
do {
    let runfiles = try Runfiles.create(sourceRepository: BazelRunfilesConstants.currentRepository)
    let fileURL = try runfiles.rlocation("my_workspace/path/to/my/data.txt")
    print("file: \(fileURL)")
} catch {
     print("runfiles error: \(error)")
}
```

To show-case the throwing API

```

> > The code above creates a manifest- or directory-based implementation based on
>   the environment variables in `Process.processInfo.environment`.
>   See `Runfiles.create()` for more info.
> 
> > The Runfiles.create function uses the runfiles manifest and the runfiles
>   directory from the RUNFILES_MANIFEST_FILE and RUNFILES_DIR environment
>   variables. If not present, the function looks for the manifest and directory
>   near CommandLine.arguments.first (argv[0]), the path of the main program.
> 
> > The BazelRunfilesConstants.currentRepository symbol is available in every
>   target that depends on the runfiles library.

Reviewer 2: nit: formatting

```suggestion
The code above:

- Creates a manifest- or directory-based implementation based on
  the environment variables in `Process.processInfo.environment`.
  See `Runfiles.create()` for more info.
- The `Runfiles.create` function uses the runfiles manifest and the runfiles
  directory from the `RUNFILES_MANIFEST_FILE` and `RUNFILES_DIR` environment
  variables. If not present, the function looks for the manifest and directory
  near `CommandLine.arguments.first` (e.g. `argv[0]` the path of the main program).
- The `BazelRunfilesConstants.currentRepository` symbol is available in every
  target that depends on the runfiles library.
```

> If you want to start subprocesses, and the subprocess can't automatically

Reviewer 3: The way the lookup works subprocesses *always* need these vars to find runfiles hermetically.

Author: In this implementation, the runfiles directory is inferred from argv0 if it can, and if the subprocess binary lives under the runfiles directory itself, the directory lookup will walk back until it finds the runfiles directory.

So the env variables are not entirely mandatory. Am I missing something ?

Reviewer 3: The "walk up the path" logic should be avoided as there is no guarantee that a "higher-up" runfiles directory is hermetic (we may be running in some outer Bazel test's runfiles directory) or present (a binary may unpack a zip with some other binary's runfiles tree in some location under `/tmp`). I would recommend to go by env vars first, otherwise by arg, otherwise fail for this reason.

Reviewer 2: @cerisier did we go with the recommended approach here?

find the correct runfiles directory, you can explicitly set the right
environment variables for them:

```swift

> import Foundation
> import BazelRunfiles
> 
> let runfiles = try? Runfiles.create(sourceRepository: BazelRunfilesConstant.currentRepository)
> 
> guard let executableURL = runfiles.rlocation("my_workspace/path/to/binary") else {
>     return
> }
> 
> let process = Process()
> process.executableURL = executableURL
> process.environment = runfiles.envVars()
> 
> do {
>     // Launch the process
>     try process.run()
>     process.waitUntilExit()
> } catch {
>     // ...
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import BazelRunfiles
import Foundation

do {

    let runfiles = try Runfiles.create(sourceRepository: BazelRunfilesConstant.currentRepository)
    let executableURL = try runfiles.rlocation("my_workspace/path/to/binary")

    let process = Process()
    process.executableURL = executableURL
    process.environment = runfiles.envVars()

    do {
        // Launch the process
        try process.run()
        process.waitUntilExit()
    } catch {
        // ...
    }
catch {
    fatalError("runfiles error: \(error)")
}
```

## Usage

1.  Depend on this runfiles library from your build rule:

```python
swift_binary(
    name = "my_binary",
    ...
    data = ["//path/to/my/data.txt"],
    deps = ["@build_bazel_rules_swift//swift/runfiles"],
)
```

2.  Include the runfiles library:

```swift
import BazelRunfiles
```

3.  Create a Runfiles instance and use `rlocation` to look up runfile urls:

```swift
import BazelRunfiles

do {
    let runfiles = try Runfiles.create()
    let fileURL = try runfiles.rlocation("my_workspace/path/to/my/data.txt")
    print("file: \(fileURL)")
} catch {
     print("runfiles error: \(error)")
}
```

The code above:

- Creates a manifest- or directory-based implementation based on
  the environment variables in `Process.processInfo.environment`.
  See `Runfiles.create()` for more info.
- The `Runfiles.create` function uses the runfiles manifest and the runfiles
  directory from the `RUNFILES_MANIFEST_FILE` and `RUNFILES_DIR` environment
  variables. If not present, the function looks for the manifest and directory
  near `CommandLine.arguments.first` (e.g. `argv[0]` the path of the main program).

> If you want to start subprocesses, and the subprocess can't automatically
> find the correct runfiles directory, you can explicitly set the right
> environment variables for them:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to start subprocesses, the runfiles library helps you set the required environment variables for them to find their runfiles:
```
Feel free to reword, but this should convey that the variables are required.
